sdk/PROTOCOL.md, before:

# Application protocol definition

This document describes the general protocol framework, which is used
by applications that communicate over WebSocket. The overall format follows
[JSON-RPC 2.0 Specification](http://www.jsonrpc.org/specification), with
following "relaxations" (or modifications):

- **jsonrpc** in request/response is omitted (or optional)

  The version 2.0 is assumed and there is no need to support 1.0.

- Event stream support (if needed)

: A method can trigger a contiquous event stream, the specifics of which depend
  totally on the method and supplied parameters. Once activated, the reponder will
  send responce objects with method specific frequency and duration, until stopped
  by another method call or an terminating error occurs. All responce objects must
  have the **id** from the request that started the stream.

- Support for **Batch** feature is open to discussion and could be
  included, if there is need.

## JSON-RPC 2.0

Short recap from the JSON-RPC specification.

**Request object**
: The request object has following format:

         {
            'method': <REQUIRED: A string defining the method name>,
            'params': <OPTIONAL: A structured value for parameters>,
            'id': <REQUIRED: a string provided by the client, opaque to server>
         }

**Reply object**
: The server must always send a reply to the any **request object**. The reply must
  either indicate succes (reply has 'result' member), or failure (reply has
  'error' member containing the **Error object**.

  Reply reporting success

         {
            'result': <REQUIRED: content depends on request>,
            'id': <REQUIRED: a string provided by the client, copied from request>
         }
         
  Reply reporting failure:

         {
            'error': <REQUIRED: Error object, see below>,
            'id': <REQUIRED: a string provided by the client, copied from request>
         }


**Notification object**
: A request object without an 'id' parameter is a notification object. Notifications
  do not require any responses from the receiving entity.

         {
            'method': <REQUIRED: A string defining the method name>,
            'params': <OPTIONAL: A structured value for parameters>,
         }

**Error object**
: The error object (in fail reply) from JSON-RPC is used as is. Application defined
  error codes can be defined, if there is a need.

        {
            'code': <A integer that indicates the error type>,
            'message': <A string providing a short description>,
            'data':  <Optional information, can be omitted>
        }

## Generic Protocol Specification and Guidelines

As noted in the JSON-RCP document, this protocol can be used
on both ends of the WebSocket connection as **server** and/or **client**
role regardless of which side actually initiated the connection.

A **client** can send multiple requests without waiting a respose in
between them.  In such case, the **server** can send the responses
when they become ready -- response order may differ from request
order.

If a request results an error object reply, the client should not
try to interpret the error code. Any error just means that the
request was not accepted. The error information is for debugging,
logging or reporting to the user in case of interactive application.

Use notifications in reporting non-fatal exceptional conditions.

### Capabilities Notification

After a WebSocket connection is established, both sides can send
**capabilities** notification. This notification defines the requests
and notifications (methods) that the sender supports.

A client should only send requests or notifications which were
explicitly allowed by the server. The only exception is the
**capabilities** notification, which can be sent any time.

The syntax of **cababilities** notification (*note the lack of id*):

     {
        "method": "capabilities",
        "params": {
          "cap1" : { <description of capability 1> },
          "cap2" : { <description of capability 2> },
          ...
        }
     }

The **params** is a dictionary of accepted capabilities, and each value
may contain optional additional information.
If there are no additional information, each capability value can be
left as an empty dictionary (or **null**).

This generic section defines some optional information members
mainly used for hinting the graphical user interface (e.g. Remote Control App)

- **help**: must be a text string representing a short description of
  the capability that could be used as a "tooltip" in graphical user
  interface (OPTIONAL).

- **group**: the value should be a simple string token, hints the user interface about
  grouping of capabilities. If not specified, the capability belongs to
  an unnamed default group.

- **label**: the value is a string containing a HTML fragment. This is used by the user
  interface in place of the method. This allows the server to style the presented
  command in the user interface (OPTIONAL).

- **schema**: If present, indicates the method accepts the indicated
  parameters. The value must be an array of *parameter definitions*,
  which will appear in the 'params' of the request object. In user
  interfaces, the input elements for the parameters are presented in
  the order they appear in the schema array.
  
  In simplest form, the *parameter definition* is a plain string,
  which defines the name of the parameter, and the value of the
  parameter will be a text string.
  
  When *parameter definition* is a dictionary, it can have following
  members:
  
  - **name**: The name of the parameter (REQUIRED)
  
  - **type**: Type of the parameter (OPTIONAL). This is only needed,
    if the JSON encoded parameter value should be something else than
    a string. Currently, only one type keyword is supported: `"type":
    "number"` requests that the input value is converted into integer.
	
  - **help**: Descrition of the parameter (OPTIONAL). This can be used
    as a tooltip for the parameter.
  
  Optionally, **only one** of the following:
  
  - **choice**: The value must be an array of choices (strings). The
    corresponding message parameter value will be one of the listed
    choices. Currently, the following specials exist:
	  
     - **`#ENBID`**: If present, it represents a list of known eNB
        identifiers (actually eNBId + cellId).

     - **`None`**: (represented as `null` in JSON). If chosen, the
       resulting parameter value is an empty string, unless also the
       type `number` is present, in which case the choice omits the
       parameter totally.

  - **range**: The value is an array of at most 4 integer values:
    `[<default>,<min>,<max>,<step>]`, any of which can be set to
    `None` (`null` in JSON). In GUI these are used for number input
     element. For example, `"range": [20]` requests an integer with
     default 20, but no other limitations.
		
  - **schema**: Defines a parameter as an object, the value must be
    an array of *parameter definitions*.

  If none of the above is present, then this *parameter definition*
  defines a simple text string input for the parameter value.
  

### Examples

Example handshake of web GUI connecting the SMA application (*assuming
the current semantics were upgraged to this protocol*):

    GUI ---> {"method": "capabilities"}
    SMA ---> {"method": "capabilities",
              "params": {"cmd1": {"help": "cmd1 help"},
                         "cmd2": {"help": "cmd2 help"}}
             }

Means that the GUI accepts no requests (actually, GUI sending this is
optional, as "no capabilities" is the default for a new WebSocket
connection), and the only request GUI can use for SMA, are the "cmd1"
and "cmd2". SMA app sends "get-list" **notifications** implicitly.

    SMA ---> {"method": "get-list", "params": <result of get-list>}
         ...
         ...
        ---> {"method": "get-list", "params": <result of get-list>}
         ...

The "get-list" could also be designed as a method that has the
streaming semantics, and thus once requested, SMA would keep sending
repeated responses whenever the content of the list changes. For
documentation purposes, the capability description could contain some
field that marks it as a streaming event (for example, have **cancel**
with value indicating the method that cancels the streaming action).

The following is just rough sketch of an idea. Defining a more generic
set of methods for subscrition service could be a better approach.

    SMA ---> {"method": "capabilities",
              "params": {"cmd1": {"help": "cmd1 help"},
                         "cmd2": {"help": "cmd2 help"},}
                         "get-list": {"help": "stream of get-list", "cancel": "cancel"},}
             }

    GUI ---> {"method": "get-list", "id": "list-report"}
    SMA ---> {"id": "list-report", "result": <result of get-list>}
         ...
         ...
        ---> {"id": "list-report", "result": <result of get-list>}
         ...
    GUI ---> {"method": "cancel", "id": "list-report-cancel-id", "params": "list-resport"}
    SMA ---> {"id": "list-report-cancel-id", "result": "list-resport"}
    
## Remote Control App  

The Remote Control App is a javascript application inside a web browser. It can be configured to retrieve information from different sources:

- standard REST API get request using a regular URL.
- COHERENT JSON-RPC web socket connection.

### REST API

Although the data retrieved by URL can be any JSON encoded reply, the control app currently only understands the reply from `flexran-rtc` /stats reply,
from which it generates graphical display of detected eNBs and UEs.

For any new type of reply, support must be programmed into the application.

### JSON-RPC API

The JSON-RPC API takes advantage of the `capabilities` notification, and generates a command panel for each
connected application. The command panel contains an action button for each advertised capability. When no
other information is present, the action button simply sends

```json
    { "method": "command", "id": "command"}
```

If the capability description includes a `schema` definition (see description in above), then the
action button pops up a new panel for providing each desired parameter. Accepting the popup panel (OK)
sends

```json
    {"method": "command", "id": "command", "params": "the parameters from the popup panel"}
```

Like REST API, if application sends special reply or notification, the control app does visualization actions
only if the support has been programmed into it. Currently, the following

- **`get-list`**: the params is assumed to contain the *options list* from SMA app, and the display will indicate
    which eNB is controlled, and whether the eNB has made the requested change.

## SMA App Protocol (Spectrum Sharing)

Examples:

Getting list of assigned rules to eNB
```json
    {"method":"get-list", "id":"get-list"}
```
Response contain all information about rule assigned to specific eNB in form of list with first entry as selected and next as optional possible but not selected. Each rule contain data such a frequency, bandwidth, cost, duration, etc.

Setting rule group (due to specific eNB)
```json
    {"method":"set-rule", "id":"set-rule", "params": {"enb_id": 3, "group":"A"}}
```
This command set rule "A" to eNB with id equal 3. Both parameters are optional. Default enb_id is 0 and default group is A.

Enable graph on PC with SMA_APP
```json 
    {"method": "enable_graph", "id":"enable_graph"}
```

Disalbe graph on PC with SMA_APP
```json
    {"method": "disable_graph", "id":"disable_graph"}
```
This two methods can turn on/off graph with price over time and with visualisation of selected bandwidth.

Saving status of application
```json
    {"method":"save_status", "id":"save_status"}
```

Loading status of application
```json
    {"method":"load_status", "id":"load_status"}
```
Save/Load data such as information of enabling graphs or table with rule assigment to eNB. 



## Monitoring APP Protocol (KPIs)

TBD <need examples and descriptions>

## RRM APP Protocol (RAN sharing)

TBD <need examples and descriptions>

Commit message:

Add 'array' keyword and support into schema definition
Signed-off-by: Markku Savela <markku.savela@vtt.fi>

sdk/PROTOCOL.md, after:

# Application protocol definition

This document describes the general protocol framework, which is used
by applications that communicate over WebSocket. The overall format follows
[JSON-RPC 2.0 Specification](http://www.jsonrpc.org/specification), with
following "relaxations" (or modifications):

- **jsonrpc** in request/response is omitted (or optional)

  The version 2.0 is assumed and there is no need to support 1.0.

- Event stream support (if needed)

: A method can trigger a contiquous event stream, the specifics of which depend
  totally on the method and supplied parameters. Once activated, the reponder will
  send responce objects with method specific frequency and duration, until stopped
  by another method call or an terminating error occurs. All responce objects must
  have the **id** from the request that started the stream.

- Support for **Batch** feature is open to discussion and could be
  included, if there is need.

## JSON-RPC 2.0

Short recap from the JSON-RPC specification.

**Request object**
: The request object has following format:

         {
            'method': <REQUIRED: A string defining the method name>,
            'params': <OPTIONAL: A structured value for parameters>,
            'id': <REQUIRED: a string provided by the client, opaque to server>
         }

**Reply object**
: The server must always send a reply to the any **request object**. The reply must
  either indicate succes (reply has 'result' member), or failure (reply has
  'error' member containing the **Error object**.

  Reply reporting success

         {
            'result': <REQUIRED: content depends on request>,
            'id': <REQUIRED: a string provided by the client, copied from request>
         }
         
  Reply reporting failure:

         {
            'error': <REQUIRED: Error object, see below>,
            'id': <REQUIRED: a string provided by the client, copied from request>
         }


**Notification object**
: A request object without an 'id' parameter is a notification object. Notifications
  do not require any responses from the receiving entity.

         {
            'method': <REQUIRED: A string defining the method name>,
            'params': <OPTIONAL: A structured value for parameters>,
         }

**Error object**
: The error object (in fail reply) from JSON-RPC is used as is. Application defined
  error codes can be defined, if there is a need.

        {
            'code': <A integer that indicates the error type>,
            'message': <A string providing a short description>,
            'data':  <Optional information, can be omitted>
        }

## Generic Protocol Specification and Guidelines

As noted in the JSON-RCP document, this protocol can be used
on both ends of the WebSocket connection as **server** and/or **client**
role regardless of which side actually initiated the connection.

A **client** can send multiple requests without waiting a respose in
between them.  In such case, the **server** can send the responses
when they become ready -- response order may differ from request
order.

If a request results an error object reply, the client should not
try to interpret the error code. Any error just means that the
request was not accepted. The error information is for debugging,
logging or reporting to the user in case of interactive application.

Use notifications in reporting non-fatal exceptional conditions.

### Capabilities Notification

After a WebSocket connection is established, both sides can send
**capabilities** notification. This notification defines the requests
and notifications (methods) that the sender supports.

A client should only send requests or notifications which were
explicitly allowed by the server. The only exception is the
**capabilities** notification, which can be sent any time.

The syntax of **cababilities** notification (*note the lack of id*):

     {
        "method": "capabilities",
        "params": {
          "cap1" : { <description of capability 1> },
          "cap2" : { <description of capability 2> },
          ...
        }
     }

The **params** is a dictionary of accepted capabilities, and each value
may contain optional additional information.
If there are no additional information, each capability value can be
left as an empty dictionary (or **null**).

This generic section defines some optional information members
mainly used for hinting the graphical user interface (e.g. Remote Control App)

- **help**: must be a text string representing a short description of
  the capability that could be used as a "tooltip" in graphical user
  interface (OPTIONAL).

- **group**: the value should be a simple string token, hints the user interface about
  grouping of capabilities. If not specified, the capability belongs to
  an unnamed default group.

- **label**: the value is a string containing a HTML fragment. This is used by the user
  interface in place of the method. This allows the server to style the presented
  command in the user interface (OPTIONAL).

- **schema**: If present, indicates the method accepts the indicated
  parameters. The value must be an array of *parameter definitions*,
  which will appear in the 'params' of the request object. In user
  interfaces, the input elements for the parameters are presented in
  the order they appear in the schema array.
  
  In simplest form, the *parameter definition* is a plain string,
  which defines the name of the parameter, and the value of the
  parameter will be a text string.
  
  When *parameter definition* is a dictionary, it can have following
  members:
  
  - **name**: The name of the parameter (REQUIRED)
  
  - **type**: Type of the parameter (OPTIONAL). This is only needed,
    if the JSON encoded parameter value should be something else than
    a string. Currently, only one type keyword is supported: `"type":
    "number"` requests that the input value is converted into number.
	
  - **help**: Descrition of the parameter (OPTIONAL). This can be used
    as a tooltip for the parameter.
  
  Optionally, **only one** of the following:
  
  - **choice**: The value must be an array of choices (strings). The
    corresponding message parameter value will be one of the listed
    choices. Currently, the following specials exist:
	  
     - **`#ENBID`**: If present, it represents a list of known eNB
        identifiers (actually eNBId + cellId).

     - **`None`**: (represented as `null` in JSON). If chosen, the
       resulting parameter value is an empty string, unless also the
       type `number` is present, in which case the choice omits the
       parameter totally.

  - **range**: The value is an array of at most 4 integer values:
    `[<default>,<min>,<max>,<step>]`, any of which can be set to
    `None` (`null` in JSON). In GUI these are used for number input
     element. For example, `"range": [20]` requests an integer with
     default 20, but no other limitations.
		
  - **schema**: Defines a parameter as an object, the value must be
    an array of *parameter definitions*.

  - **array**: Defines parameter as an array of values, the value must
    be a dictionary, where following keywords are recognized:

      - **length**: The (initial) length of the array.

      - **type**: Type (OPTIONAL) of the element value (see above). This is
	    ignored, if the array element itself is defined by **schema** or **array**.

      - OPTIONAL keywords **choice**, **range**, **schema** or **array** as
	    defined above, can be used to specify more complex values for the array
		elements.

  If none of the above is present, then this *parameter definition*
  defines a simple text string input for the parameter value.
  

### Examples

Example handshake of web GUI connecting the SMA application (*assuming
the current semantics were upgraged to this protocol*):

    GUI ---> {"method": "capabilities"}
    SMA ---> {"method": "capabilities",
              "params": {"cmd1": {"help": "cmd1 help"},
                         "cmd2": {"help": "cmd2 help"}}
             }

Means that the GUI accepts no requests (actually, GUI sending this is
optional, as "no capabilities" is the default for a new WebSocket
connection), and the only request GUI can use for SMA, are the "cmd1"
and "cmd2". SMA app sends "get-list" **notifications** implicitly.

    SMA ---> {"method": "get-list", "params": <result of get-list>}
         ...
         ...
        ---> {"method": "get-list", "params": <result of get-list>}
         ...

The "get-list" could also be designed as a method that has the
streaming semantics, and thus once requested, SMA would keep sending
repeated responses whenever the content of the list changes. For
documentation purposes, the capability description could contain some
field that marks it as a streaming event (for example, have **cancel**
with value indicating the method that cancels the streaming action).

The following is just rough sketch of an idea. Defining a more generic
set of methods for subscrition service could be a better approach.

    SMA ---> {"method": "capabilities",
              "params": {"cmd1": {"help": "cmd1 help"},
                         "cmd2": {"help": "cmd2 help"},}
                         "get-list": {"help": "stream of get-list", "cancel": "cancel"},}
             }

    GUI ---> {"method": "get-list", "id": "list-report"}
    SMA ---> {"id": "list-report", "result": <result of get-list>}
         ...
         ...
        ---> {"id": "list-report", "result": <result of get-list>}
         ...
    GUI ---> {"method": "cancel", "id": "list-report-cancel-id", "params": "list-resport"}
    SMA ---> {"id": "list-report-cancel-id", "result": "list-resport"}
    
## Remote Control App  

The Remote Control App is a javascript application inside a web browser. It can be configured to retrieve information from different sources:

- standard REST API get request using a regular URL.
- COHERENT JSON-RPC web socket connection.

### REST API

Although the data retrieved by URL can be any JSON encoded reply, the control app currently only understands the reply from `flexran-rtc` /stats reply,
from which it generates graphical display of detected eNBs and UEs.

For any new type of reply, support must be programmed into the application.

### JSON-RPC API

The JSON-RPC API takes advantage of the `capabilities` notification, and generates a command panel for each
connected application. The command panel contains an action button for each advertised capability. When no
other information is present, the action button simply sends

```json
    { "method": "command", "id": "command"}
```

If the capability description includes a `schema` definition (see description in above), then the
action button pops up a new panel for providing each desired parameter. Accepting the popup panel (OK)
sends

```json
    {"method": "command", "id": "command", "params": "the parameters from the popup panel"}
```

Like REST API, if application sends special reply or notification, the control app does visualization actions
only if the support has been programmed into it. Currently, the following

- **`get-list`**: the params is assumed to contain the *options list* from SMA app, and the display will indicate
    which eNB is controlled, and whether the eNB has made the requested change.

## SMA App Protocol (Spectrum Sharing)

Examples:

Getting list of assigned rules to eNB
```json
    {"method":"get-list", "id":"get-list"}
```
Response contain all information about rule assigned to specific eNB in form of list with first entry as selected and next as optional possible but not selected. Each rule contain data such a frequency, bandwidth, cost, duration, etc.

Setting rule group (due to specific eNB)
```json
    {"method":"set-rule", "id":"set-rule", "params": {"enb_id": 3, "group":"A"}}
```
This command set rule "A" to eNB with id equal 3. Both parameters are optional. Default enb_id is 0 and default group is A.

Enable graph on PC with SMA_APP
```json 
    {"method": "enable_graph", "id":"enable_graph"}
```

Disalbe graph on PC with SMA_APP
```json
    {"method": "disable_graph", "id":"disable_graph"}
```
This two methods can turn on/off graph with price over time and with visualisation of selected bandwidth.

Saving status of application
```json
    {"method":"save_status", "id":"save_status"}
```

Loading status of application
```json
    {"method":"load_status", "id":"load_status"}
```
Save/Load data such as information of enabling graphs or table with rule assigment to eNB. 



## Monitoring APP Protocol (KPIs)

TBD <need examples and descriptions>

## RRM APP Protocol (RAN sharing)

TBD <need examples and descriptions>
